An Honest Confession
This was written after an October 9th fireside chat.
I confess:
I have always considered myself a late-starter in my pursuit of Artificial Intelligence.
Granted, that to most people sophomore is still elementary school, but the apex of human
performance and intelligence is somewhere around 30. Therefore my vision for the future
is never retirement---my limit for myself is 40 years old. By that standard I have already
wasted half of my life.
I have done a lot of AI fundamentals by reading here-and-there and taking online
courses. But those are basic! Still I was content, thinking that I “deserve” to take a rest,
because I still expected everything to be spoon-fed to me, just like high school. Perhaps
more aptly, I was interested in AI, but was too cowardly to step out of my comfort zone.
Then the fire was ignited, through an intimate fireside chat with Chris Olah, a former
Google Brain researcher. He is a true researcher. He is willing to drop out of university to
pursue his passion in 3-D printing, he likes to walk around and shake his head when he
gets excited talking, and I only feel genuineness when listening to him---genuine about
his relentless pursuit in interpretability---why neural networks work the way they do. “We
don’t know how they work, and yet we use them and trust them so much!” he said. But to
me (and him) it’s even more than safety concerns. Because we both know that it is our
natural, visceral curiosity to explore the mystery that we cannot yet comprehend. If we
can figure out neural nets then why can’t we figure out humans? That has always been
the height of my contemplation, and it is that immense excitement that shattered my pride
over schoolwork---which shouldn’t be a surprise! I have always gone through
schoolwork like a breeze, to the extent that most of it is no longer interesting to me
anymore. But deep down I have always quested for an answer, a reason behind human
intelligence. Now, only possibilities lie ahead of me.
A toast to passion, and to my dream.
Qiyao Wei
2018/10/09 11:27pm
