General Curiosity

  This interaction happened a few weeks ago, but it’s likely something I wouldn’t forget in
years. My “Introduction to Probability” professor one day made an arguably controversial comment
in class—“I’m disappointed that none of you wondered about the reason we use the word
probability in mathematical formulation, but possibility and chance in life. Such as: What are the
chances of something happening? I think that implies a lack of curiosity and, if I may say, intellect.”
  I don’t agree with that assertion. In fact, I am not likely to agree with this statement in the
near future, even as I gradually begin to realize what he is really referring to. After all, strong
intellectual curiosity isn’t necessarily equivalent to manifested interest in etymology, right? His
answer, when I raised this question in a casual conversation, is that small things like these reflect
how sensitive a learner is to the ambient environment. Without such sensitivity for the current state
and expected actions of the environment, you can never be a true researcher.
  This term “general curiosity” actually came up in one of our other discussions regarding
graduate studies. I have been inspired by our intelligence for a long time, and if I can crack the code
of the human brain, or even build human-level intelligence in my lifetime, that would be “something
commensurate to my capacity for wonder”. As an undergrad with his mind set on pursuing deeper
knowledge, it is clearly vital to choose a sensible direction of research. This is where general
curiosity comes in. Any field of research is complicated enough that you likely won’t be able to
understand its entirety. However, you need to get a sense of where the field is going, where everyone
else is going, and where your direction is headed. Similarly, it is always interesting to me that at the
beginning of documented history of human civilization, Plato viewed Mathematics as the only field
of research. Later Aristotle, Bacon, and others brought empiricism to life, and we obtain the fields
of biology, physics, chemistry, (more recently) computer science and neuroscience. We have broken
down these fields to better characterize each area of research, but increasingly we realize the
importance of multidisciplinary work. Perhaps the ultimate creation of mankind requires that we
combines all the fields we currently have, along with Plato’s eternal favorite Mathematics, into one
grand category of knowledge that is not yet tangible to us. This attention, both intradisciplinary and
interdisciplinary, is what I would define as “general curiosity”.
  Many of my past views were reformed by this realization. Like many new-starters in
Artificial Intelligence, I originally vowed to write a competent ML program—through Python or C+
+, Tensorflow or Pytorch—something that can perform well in a hackathon or some Kaggle
competition. But as I moved forward I started to… not devalue, but see a certain vanity in these
ideas. Why should I care about achieving performance that’s 0.1% better, and am I really inspired by
the fact that I can write a sophisticated CNN using Tensorflow in half an hour? Of course not. This
was never my interest, and never will be.
  In my perspective, if you hold the weapon of general curiosity, you gain sight to a
mesmerizing infinity. I cannot guarantee what I can achieve in the future. I cannot guarantee what I
can achieve in life. But we fear the end of life because we know to expect it, and we stay hopeful
about tomorrow because we don’t know what to expect in it. All I can say is, learning makes me
happy, and being curious makes me feel I am alive.

2019.10.14, Thanksgiving in Canada: This is something I am thankful for
