HPS210H1 F
Qiyao Wei 1004340395
2019.11.18
On Francis Bacon “A Guide to the Interpretation of Nature”
  “Man is the measure of all things”, as pre-Copernican scholars would claim, quoting
Protogoras’ famous words with boasting confidence (Epps, 1). Indeed, ever since Aristotle, the
greatest thinkers had been operating on the blind faith that mankind is special. Therefore, as this
assertion suggests, our environment must be defined by how we sense it. It is upon this belief
that geocentricity had been held for thousands of years, and it is very much due to the gradual
crippling of the geocentricity theory in the first half of the 17th century that man came to the
abandonment of anthropocentrism. Starting with Copernicus, then onto Kepler and Galileo, and
finally Descartes, this small group of scientific scholars would have to come up against the most
basic assumption in early Western philosophy—man is the center of the universe. As us modern
people look back, we now agree that there exists another interpretation to Protogoras’ words—in
the infinite universe, man only comprehend to the extent of which we can measure, and anything
beyond our measurement is therefore incomprehensible.
  In his “A Guide to the Interpretation of Nature”, Bacon demonstrates the importance of
inductive reasoning and experimentation. The core difference between inductive and deductive
reasoning is that the former involves generalization at the very end, with the aid of
experimentation, whereas the latter requires generalization at the beginning. Throughout this
literature review we note the importance of inductive reasoning and experimentation, but we
place emphasis on Bacon’s delivery of these core concepts. It is because he lives through a time
of drastic philosophical change that he must propose his ideas thoroughly and carefully. Being
surrounded by contemporaries that mostly converge to Aristotelian deductive science, Bacon
must take extreme caution in conveying himself in the most lucid way possible. As we appreciate
Bacon’s writing from a modern perspective, we credit him for being almost extravagantly
explicit and straight-forward, and we acknowledge his purpose to educate his contemporaries,
even though his effort of doing so seems to us as repetitive.
  Prior to proposing inductive reasoning, Bacon clearly must exploit the weakness of
classical deductive reasoning—common sense. He compares “a naked mind” to “a once naked
body”, cleverly reflecting the credulity of our common sense by conveying a sense of insecurity,
if our mind was all by itself (Bacon, 2). He also alludes to deductive reasoning as an “old
science”, therefore calling for the appearance of a new science like inductive reasoning (Bacon,
2). The novelty of inductive reasoning is well deserved, for even though the propositions by
Copernicus and Tycho Brahe hinted at inductive science, Bacon is widely regarded as the first
person to collect the emergent new thinking and develop it into a canonical document. It is also
worth noting that Bacon takes caution in the refutal of deductive reasoning, by characterizing the
legitimacy of deductive reasoning as “noticed and discovered” (Bacon, 2). As he explains in later
paragraphs, what is wrong with classical logic is not the notion of deductive reasoning, but the
assumptions that our common sense is flawless. Nevertheless, the firm belief that there is a
method of reasoning missing from the contemporary philosophy, as well as the conviction that
inductive reasoning fills that void, leads Bacon to conclude the introduction with the almost
rebellious claim—“the accepted divisions merely reflect the currently accepted outline of the
sciences.” (Bacon, 3)
  In further effort to illustrate the dichotomy, Bacon directly compares inductive and
deductive reasoning, picking out syllogism as a representation of the widely accepted, “ordinary”
deductive reasoning logic (Bacon, 4). Bacon contrasts “arts” with “arguments”, “principles” with
“inference”, and “work” with “disputation” (Bacon, 4). This comparison is a direct blow at
Aristotelian science, in which philosophers arrived at the truth by arguing with contemporaries,
sometimes the conclusion ludicrously reached by judging whichever side had more supporting
books. Then Bacon takes a step back and acknowledges the “mathematical certainty” of
deductive reasoning, explicitly stating, for the first (not only) time, in his essay that our mind
being “badly abstracted from things” is the source of all evil (Bacon, 5). It is interesting to note
that Bacon doesn’t employ any examples in his criticism of deductive reasoning, the most
famous of which would be the deduction towards geostaticity. Modern scientific writing
combines the description of ideas with concrete examples to achieve an illustrative effect, which
clearly works better than having the reader follow long lines of literary prose. However, Bacon’s
audience is familiar enough with deductive reasoning that Bacon doesn’t see the need to refer to
extraneous examples. Nevertheless, we marvel at Bacon’s ability to describe the distinction
between inductive and deductive reasoning in the most enlightening way possible1, which I could
not have summarized better myself. (last paragraph on page 5, paragraph 8 overall)
  At this stage it seems that Bacon has fully contrasted inductive and deductive reasoning,
inductive for the win. However, recall that the reason deductive reasoning fails is not because of
the reasoning logic—for a correct assumption and a correct deduction process, we will for sure
arrive at the correct result—but because of our own senses. Therefore Bacon, applying the
technique of repetition and treating the audience as toddlers first learning about a new science—
indeed they are—assures that the one thing his audience will remember after reading his writing
is not the failure of deductive reasoning, but the detriment of our gullible senses. This rides the
tide of history—starting from the Copernican theory, the gradual collapse of geocentricity and
geostaticity bear dramatic effects on contemporary philosophy, one of which being the
acknowledgement of deception, as portrayed by art works at the time. It is amusing that even
though Bacon is willing to defend deductive reasoning, he is in no position to defend the
logicians that carry out deduction. Bacon directly refers to the logicians as “childish” and
“immediate”, which is not unjustified (Bacon, 6 and 7). These logicians, exemplified by the
Roman Catholic Church, rejected the Copernican theory as a mere hypothesis, and later trialed
Galileo for disrupting the church belief system. The church had been a major proponent of
scientific development since its establishment, but there isn’t a doubt that in this period, they
cling on stubbornly to their belief, until the time has come to acknowledge that “the evidence and
information given by the senses is always based on the analogy of man not of the universe; it is a
very great error to assert that the senses are the measure of things” (Bacon, 7).
  As promised in a triumphant tone to “claim possession” of the idea, Bacon moves on to
discuss the methodology to perform inductive reasoning in the correct way (Bacon, 3). However,
Bacon does that in his classical way of criticizing of the human mind, as well as the old
philosophy. He compares the human mind to an “uneven mirror”, proposes a “refutation of
philosophies, proofs, and natural human reason”, contrasts the “hard work” of experimentation
with the old procedure of “making up stories”, and concludes the rebuttal in full denial of the old
science approaches, as they provide “no development or progress” (Bacon, 9 and 10 and 11 and
12). What follows seems like a proposal of the concrete methodology as Bacon promised, but is
still a denial of the old ideas. Bacon merely alarms us of “apple of Atalanta”, and reminds us
about the importance of caution, demonstrated by his euphemistic allusion as well as direct
reference to the word for at least 5 times in his writing (Bacon, 12). In this sense, Bacon’s
attempt to introduce proper methodology is relatively unsuccessful compared to his pedagogical
efforts to establish the new science. This part of his writing seems especially unappealing to us,
since we are familiar with advance concepts such as “the six steps of hypothesis testing”.
  Nevertheless, we give Bacon credit for summarizing the reason for experimentation as
illuminating as “the sense judge only of the experiment, the experiment judge of the
thing” (Bacon, 8). He also proposes progressive methodology in the notion of “harassing
nature”—if we don’t impose restrictions on nature and let it “go its own way”, we can never
truly discover the course of nature (Bacon, 12). This is not to say that nature will conceive
everything from us—just look at Newton’s apple. However, it is not after extensive testing that
Newton dare propose his gravitational theory, which bolds well with Bacon’s theory. Finally,
Bacon proposes the intriguing notion of peripheral and far-fetching ideas, providing a new
perspective into the distinction between inductive and deductive reasoning. The inspiration of
subsidiary ideas are unique to inductive experiments. Due to the nature of induction, there exists
a possibility of expansion, from small-scope observations to more general theorems. Therefore,
there is no limitation in the direction in which we can explore, and even though the
experimentation originally sets out to verify an idea, other directions are equally valid. It is in his
pursuit of gravitational physics that Newton invented the foundations of modern calculus. Even
if not proven immediately, conjectures is another way to promote intellectual thinking—who
knows what the future would look like if Copernicus hadn’t come across Hipparchus’ hypothesis
of heliocentricity, albeit the fact that he by no means provided a proof to it? We see no such cases
in deduction, for the simple reason that deduction starts from general principles, and nullifies the
chance of extrapolation.
  We must revere the talent of Bacon. He has gathered and established a scientific system
(which we still use at this day and age) that would come to inspire Descartes, Newton, and many
others. His contributions rival that of Von Neumann to computing, or Godel to mathematics.


References
Epps, P. H. “Protagoras' Famous Statement.” The Classical Journal, vol. 59, no. 5, 1964, pp.
223–226. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/3295019.
Bacon, Francis, and Thomas Fowler. Novum Organum. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1889. Print.



Appendix
Best excerpts:
1st page, 1st paragraph, 2nd last sentence—
“Where his predecessors regarded experiment as a litmus test of theory that had been derived by
a process of deductive reasoning, Bacon took experiment to be the very foundation of science
and its generalized methodology”
1st page, 2nd paragraph, last sentence—
“Where Aristotelian science was based on a set of rules that governed the consistency between
conclusion and a set of premises accepted unquestioningly as true, Bacon’s new experimental
style was designed to investigate the soundness of the very foundations of scientific theory — that
is, to put nature itself to the test”
2nd page, 1st paragraph, 2nd sentence—
“For a naked mind is the companion of innocence and simplicity, as once upon a time the naked
body was”
4th page, 2nd paragraph, 1st sentence—
“For the end we propose for our science is the discovery of arts, not of arguments, of principles
and not of inferences from principles, or signs and indications or works and not probable
reasonings”
6th page, 3rd paragraph, last sentence—
“And if the logicians’ usual form of judgment has been so difficult and required so much
intellectual exertion, how much more effort should we expend on this other judgment, which is
drawn not only from the depths of the mind but from the bowels of nature”
7th page, 2nd paragraph, last sentence—
“For the evidence and information given by the senses is always based on the analogy of man
not of the universe; it is a very great error to assert that the senses are the measure of things”
12th page, 2nd paragraph, 1st sentence—
“And as for its composition, we are making a history not only for nature free and unconstrained
(when nature goes its own way and does its own work), such as a history of the bodies of heaven
and the sky, of land and sea, or minerals, plants and animals; but much more of nature confined
and harassed, when it is forced from its own condition by art and human agency, and pressured
and molded”
16th page, 1st paragraph, 3rd last sentence—
“One should not be frightened of such a suspension of judgment in a doctrine which does not
assert simply that nothing can be known, but that nothing can be known except in a certain order
and by a certain method; and meanwhile it has set up some degrees of certitude for use and
comfort until the mind reaches its goal of explanation of its causes”
17th page, 2nd paragraph, 3rd and 2nd last sentence—
“For man is nature’s agent and interpreter; he does and understands only as much as he has
observed of the order of nature in works or in inference; he does not know and cannot do more.
No strength exists that that can interrupt or break that chain of causes; and nature is conquered
only be obedience”
17th page, 3rd paragraph, 1st sentence—
“The whole secret is to never let the mind’s eye stray from things themselves, and to take images
exactly as they are”
